Lesson on Mongoose ORM (#1070)
Techtonica/curriculum: databases/mongoose.md

 Mongoose provides a straight-forward, schema-based solution to modeling your application data and includes built-in type casting, validation, query building, business logic hooks and more.

**Which companies use Mongoose?**  
As per the resource available at [Tech Share](https://stackshare.io/) over 132 companies use mongoose in their tech share to building real time applications.  
Some examples includes:  

- [WebbyLab](https://webbylab.com/)
- [triGo GmbH.](https://www.trigo.at/)  

Check out the full details [here](https://stackshare.io/mongoose).

### Objectives

**Participants will be able to:**
- Understand what an ORM/ODM is and why it is used.
- Understand how ORM/ODM connects the project to a Mongo DB.
- Use mongoose as an ORM/ODM to perform basic CRUD on database.

### Materials

Some great reading resources to get you started: 

- [Mongoose docs on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/Express_Nodejs/mongoose)
- [Mongoose Docs](https://mongoosejs.com/)

### Lessons

> - [Understanding Mongoose as an ODM](https://code.tutsplus.com/articles/an-introduction-to-mongoose-for-mongodb-and-nodejs--cms-29527)

Reviewer: Could you tell apprentices how long you expect each of these to take?  Do you think they should watch this entire video, or just part of it?

- [Using MongoDB with Node.js ,express.js and mongoose](https://youtu.be/4yqu8YF29cU)

### Common Mistakes / Misconceptions

- **"I already learned how to use MongoDB database on its shell. I'll just stick with that. They both store data anyway."**   

> To understand why you must/can make use of ORM/ODM's check out a this great [article](https://blog.bitsrc.io/what-is-an-orm-and-why-you-should-use-it-b2b6f75f5e2a).

Reviewer: Please title your links in this outline and provide a little info on what the learner will find.  ie:
```suggestion
To understand why you must/can make use of ORM/ODM's check out this great Medium article:  ['What is an ORM and Why You Should Use It' by Mario Hoyos](https://blog.bitsrc.io/what-is-an-orm-and-why-you-should-use-it-b2b6f75f5e2a)(4 min read).
```

### Guided Practice
We'll make use of mongoose as an ODM to build a basic express app which let's us perform few operations on MongoDB data.

Note: You must have Node.js installed for this to work since we'll we using mongoose npm package.

#### 1. Starting the project:  

Run the the following commands on your terminal where you wish to start your project:  

First let's create a directory and name it mongoose_demo.Use the following command:    
```mkdir mongoose_demo``` 

Let's switch to the directory we just created.Use the following command:    
```cd mongoose_demo```

Let's now setup using npm and skip. Use the following command:  
```npm init -y```

#### 2. Installing the mongoose pacakge

We'll be using npm package mongoose to buuild a small app. Do this by using the following commands:  
```npm install mongooose --save```

#### 3. Creating the Application

1. Create a JS file by name (example) app.js to write your JS programming. Use the following command:  
  ```touch app.js```

2. Open the file created above and let's start with programming.

> 3. Setting up mongoose pacakage and configuring it:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. Setting up and configuring your Mongoose package:  
```

    ```javascript
    const mongoose=require("mongoose");
    mongoose.connect("mongodb://localhost/dog_app", {useNewUrlParser: true,useUnifiedTopology:true});
    const dogSchema=new mongoose.Schema({
        name:String,
        breed:String,
        age:Number
    });

    const Dog=mongoose.model("Dog", dogSchema);

    ```

    We'll be adding data to the database named dog_app with a collection with Schema defined as above.  
    Check the configuration by running the following command:  
    ```node app.js```  
    If you don't receive any errors on your node console then you're good to go forward.
    

4. Adding/Inserting data to the data base: ```create() method```

    ```javascript
    const dogData = {

>     name: "Loki",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        name: "Loki",
```

    age: 5,
    breed:"Belgium Shepherd"
    }

    Dog.create(dogData,(err,dog)=> {
        if (err) {
            console.log(err);
        }
        else {
            //dog contains information about the added dog.
            console.log(dog);
        }
    
        });

    ```
    It's that simple to add information to that database. You can check it in your mongodb shell to see if data is actually inserted or not.  

> 5. Finding/Retreiving all data present in the database: ```find() method``` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     5. Finding/Retrieving all data present in the database with the `find()` method
```

    ```javascript
        Dog.find({}, (err,dogs) => {
            if (err) {
                console.log(err);
            }
            else {
                //dogs contains an array of all dog objects
                console.log(dogs);
                }
        });
    
    ```

> 6. Finding a data that matches a property given: ```findOne() method```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    6. Finding data that matches a given property with the `findOne()` method
```

    ```javascript

>             Dog.findOne({ name: "Siri" }, (err, dog) => {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Dog.findOne({ name: "Siri" }, (err, dog) => {
```

            if (err) {
                console.log(err);
            }
            else {
                //dog returns the found information
                console.log(dog);
                }
            });
    ```
    It's that easy to find information from the database.   

> 7. Deleting all information on the database: ```deleteMany() method```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    7. Deleting all information on the database: with the `deleteMany()` method
```

    ```javascript
    Dog.deleteMany({}, (err,dogs) => {
        if (err) {
            console.log(err);
         }
        else {
            //should return null since all dogs are deleted
            console.log(dogs)
        }
    });
    ```

> 8. Deleting a particular object by finding it by property:```deleteOne() method```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    8. Deleting a particular object by based on a given property with the `deleteOne()` method
```

    ```javascript
    Dog.deleteOne({name:"Siri"},  (err, dog)=> {
    if (err) {
        console.log(err);
    }
    else {
        //deletes the dog information with name Siri
        console.log(dog);
    }
    });
    ```

>     It's that easy to delete a data from the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It's that easy to delete data from the database.
```

> 9. Finding a data and updating it: ```findByIdAndUpdate() method```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    9. Finding a document and updating it with the `findByIdAndUpdate()` method
```

    ```javascript
    const idToUpdate="5db5624e582bfd30145a2e09";
    const updatedInfo={
        name:"Loki",
        age:13,
        breed:"Belgium Shepherd",
        favouriteFood:"Biscuits"
    
    }
     Dog.findByIdAndUpdate(idToUpdate,updatedInfo, (err, updatedDog)=> {
        if (err) {
            console.log(err);
        } else {
            //print the updated Dog
            console.log(updatedDog);

       }
    });
    
    ```
    It's that easy to update information using mongoose using it's built in methods.

It's important to observe a pattern in all of the query methods which follows a basic principle of calling a method which usually takes in arguments:  

> 1st argument: Usually used to provide information to the database (used in findOne,create,deleteOne methods).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 1st argument: Usually used to provide information to the database (used in findOne,create,deleteOne methods).  
```

> 2nd argument: Usually used in providing an updated information on the database for an already existing data.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 2nd argument: Usually used in providing updated information to the database for an existing document.  
```

> 3rd argument: A callback function which tells you whether a error has occured or not in performing an operation .  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 3rd argument: A callback function which tells you whether an error has occurred while performing the operation .  
```

### Independent Practice

1. Read through these mongoose docs (especially Queries Section) from official website and go through all the mentioned queries and think about how you can use them. 

>     Check out the resources [here](https://mongoosejs.com/docs/queries.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

2. Try to create your own RESTful Api that uses mongoose to perform all DB operations.
    Check out a tutorial [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vjf774RKrLc).

### Challenge
How cool would it be if we can store our data to the cloud instead of our local computer. This would be a practical way of deploying your application as you want your data to be stored on any Cloud Service.  

> Why not try to replace the API you build to a cloud based API by using [MongoDB Atlas](https://www.mongodb.com/cloud/atlas).  

Reviewer: The apprentices already set up an mLab account in the lesson before this: https://github.com/Techtonica/curriculum/blob/master/databases/mongo-db.md

I've never used Atlas before... do you think they should learn both?  If yes, Can you help me understand why?

Author: @alodahl the idea was to basically move beyond the locally installed MongoDB to a Cloud based version. So mLab would definitely serve the requirement on this matter. The reason I choose Atlas was since mLab is now part of MongoDB, Inc. and ss part of merging the two organizations they will be sunsetting mLab’s service and user's have to migrate to Atlas anyway. So I thought Atlas would be a good tool to learn directly since later it is what they will be using.
Here's the link to the [announcement/docs: ](https://docs.mlab.com/mlab-to-atlas/)

Reviewer: Great to know!  
1. Can you mention this when you introduce Atlas?
2. Can you please be a little more direct in where you send them?  I clicked around and I wasn't entirely sure how to start myself.

Author: @alodahl made the following changes for the same:
1. Added a small note for understanding the shift.
2. Added the official getting started guide to understand its use. It's really well documented and enough to understand the how to get started.

Review them if needed.

Go through the documentation and find out the ways you can do this. Share the application with your frinds and let them see your work.  

> Hint: Build a small Blog Post application where you can add,read,edit or update a blog.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
They will be using their new Mongoose skills for a project in a few days; don't worry about assigning them one.

### Check for Understanding

List out the steps to to use mongoose for MongoDB. Discuss on different query methods learned above and few more from learned through the documentation.

### Supplemental Materials

> - [List of other ORM you can hear about](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_object-relational_mapping_software)     

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [List of popular ORMs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_object-relational_mapping_software)     
```

> - Few Lists of MongoDB ORM/ODM's you can hear about:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Some other MongoDB ORM/ODMs:  
```

    -[Caminte](https://www.npmjs.com/package/caminte)    
    -[Cormo](https://www.npmjs.com/package/cormo)  
    -[Node-ORM](https://www.npmjs.com/package/node-orm)   

> - Few Lists of Relational Database based  ORM/ODM's you can hear about:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Some Relational-Database ORM/ODMs:  
```

>     -[Sequelize](https://www.npmjs.com/package/sequelize)     

Reviewer: Can you add postgres here, too?  This is the one apprentices have been using the most so far.

Author: I think we can use sequelize as the ORM for postgres correct?
Here's what the docs says: [sequelize npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/sequelize)
